# Machine Learning
{term}`Machine learning` is part of the broader field of artificial intelligence. The goal of machine learning is to build models that allow a computer to perform a particular task by learning from experience, without being explicitly programmed. Many machine learning algorithms require a data set to consist of a set of {term}`instance`s that all have particular {term}`feature`s with a value. For example, a data set might consist of records of transactions containing the amount and the age of the account holder. In this data set, each instance represents a particular transaction, the features are amount and age, and the feature values are, for example, €100 and 25 years.

## Learning Paradigms
The field of machine learning can roughly be divided into three areas: {term}`supervised learning`, {term}`unsupervised learning`, and {term}`reinforcement learning`.

The goal of {term}`supervised learning` is to learn to predict a particular {term}`target variable` of an unseen instance. For example, we might want to train a model that is able to predict whether an e-mail (consisting of several features such as whether they contain certain words) is spam (target). The machine learning algorithm builds a model based on a data set that includes both the instances' features and the target variable. Supervised learning can be further categorized based on the target variable type. In {term}`regression` problems, the target variable is continuous. In {term}`classification` problems, the target variable is a categorical variable. The different categories are referred to as {term}`class`}es. The {term}`binary classification` problem is a particular type of classification problems in which the target variable can take two values. The two classes are usually represented as 0 and 1 and referred to as the {term}`negative class` and {term}`positive class` respectively. Note that the distinction between the positive and negative class merely indicates what we are trying to detect and does not imply sentiment. For example, in the case of fraud detection, we are interested in detecting fraudulent transactions. Therefore, a fraudulent transaction belongs to the positive class - even though fraud is typically not deemed desirable.

The {term}`unsupervised learning` area considers learning patterns in the data without a target variable, such as clusters of similar instances or topics of texts. In {term}`reinforcement learning`, on the other hand, the goal is to learn which actions to take in order to maximize a particular reward. 

## Supervised Learning 
The focus of this book is on supervised learning. At an abstract level, a supervised machine learning model can be seen as a function that maps the input features to the corresponding target variable output. The task of the machine learning algorithm is to find the best mapping between the input features and the target variable.

Many machine learning algorithms are formulated as an optimization task to minimize a {term}`loss function`. This function formalizes the costs of an error. For example, the 0-1 loss function is equal to 1 if the model misclassifies an instance, and 0 if it is correct.

## Machine Learning Algorithms
An elaborate discussion on different learning algorithms is beyond the scope of this book. There are many excellent books, blog posts, and online courses that cover the mathematical details and internal workings of machine learning algorithms, see also [Further Reading](intromlfurtherreading).